welcome to the top cast and to a live
topcast science news and ask me anything
and I decided to sit over if you're
watching this on YouTube to sit over at
the side
on one side of the screen because I
thought oh look what I can do is do some
science news and put some images up
later on you know for the people who
watch us later as it turns out although
YouTube Studio has a thing called a
video editor the video editor editor no
longer has the capacity to add images so
that shouldn't matter too much because
the overwhelming majority of people of
course who are fans of topcast listen
via audio so apologies to the people on
YouTube today because
um I'm going to be talking about science
news and pretty pictures without the
pretty pictures I just don't have a
facility to put them up I kind of do I
mean I have a screen and that's what I
might do in the future but I didn't have
time to organize that today
but for audio listeners hey I'm going to
have to be
um descriptive I suppose of some things
because the first a bit of science news
I wanted to talk about was yet more
images released by the James Webb Space
Telescope and this time uh just a day
ago so we're talking on the 16th of
March now so the 15th of March
uh a star 30 times more massive than the
sun uh
is
um a variable star of a Kind called a
wolf Riot star and a wolf Riot star is
very close to the end of its life
is about to go supernova but of course
when you hear that term about about to
about to go supernova in astrophysics
think anywhere from now to millions of
years away we just don't know when the
thing will explode but because it is so
massive 30 times more massive than the
Sun
and unstable
the best explanations say that the thing
will explode at some point
and the Wolf Riot star is characterized
by
sort of going Nova not Supernova Nova is
when I start like the sun typically
towards the end of its life doesn't
explode
um expands out to a red giant but then
in the very final throes of death before
it ends its life as a white dwarf it
releases its atmosphere most of it which
which collapses in onto the hot core and
then suddenly expands out again but not
as an explosion it just expands rapidly
increasing the brightness so that's
called a Nova you know from the Greek
for new new star appeared in the sky and
so this is what this wolf Riot star is
doing at the moment it's releasing lots
and lots of gas from its atmosphere in
sort of waves
and the James Webb Space Telescope has
uh
taken lovely pictures of this and so you
can go look that up just look up wolf
Riot star Riot r-a-y-e-t and wolf Just
Like the Wolf the animal
um and
this this picture is spectacular it's a
spectacular pretty pink picture
of this star near the end of its life
uh absolutely dwarfed by the nebula of
gas that now surrounds it uh so this is
um one of the latest images released by
the James Webb Space Telescope
um these things came to seem to be
dribbling out now and again the James
Webb Space Telescope of course does a
lot of things
much of which isn't pretty pictures
a lot of which is detecting Spectra and
that kind of thing and those don't look
all that impressive but now and again
it'll take a very impressive picture
which has to be computer enhanced and
that kind of thing because it's an
infrared telescope anyway
um people always worry about that you
know are they lying to us when they
color enhance these things we have to
if you take a picture in the X-ray part
of the spectrum you have to enhance it
otherwise people wouldn't be able to see
it
or to appear just as a black and white
kind of thing okay so that's
that's James Webb and the latest news
from there
uh some more science news
um and this was just yesterday as well
also on the theme of astronomy uh the
headline is this is a Forbes article
Venus is volcanically active right now
say scientists using 32 year old images
now we should expect as a matter of
geology
that Venus would be volcanically active
it's approximately the same diameter as
Earth the same mass as Earth
we would expect that obviously the
atmosphere is entirely different but the
geology should be similar and the reason
the geology should be similar in many
respects is because geology is largely
driven by The Heat Of The Core
The Heat Of The Core as
the heat left over from when the solar
system formed Plus
the radioactivity of the decay of
radioactive substances that are there in
the core why are these radioactive
substances there in the core at a higher
concentration than what they are at the
surface well remember all planets
started out as liquid rock because it
was so hot
and liquids being liquids the densest
thing falls to the bottom and the
densest thing on the periodic table
uranium among other things other
radioactive stuff and so they coalesce
at the core
that's where you have a lot of
concentration of these things so I have
to dig deep into the ground typically
speaking to get hold of uh these dense
materials because much of it is sunk
towards the bottom why didn't they all
sink because of chemistry
the uranium was able to react chemically
with some other materials to form
certain oars like pitch blend and so
therefore some of that stuff is near the
surface lucky for us so then we can have
nuclear reactors and the whole nuclear
science Industry and all that kind of
thing
but anyway in the case of Venus we would
expect it's going to be similar to Earth
in terms of its core it's going to have
a very hot core a solid inner core
because of the pressure solid and the
outer core would be liquid liquid
um
Rock effectively but you know mixture of
metals and other things high in
radioactivity cooling down over time
but which would provide energy to the
mantle the the the thing outside the
core that
is a kind of matter that isn't quite
liquid and not quite solid they usually
refer to it as plastic
plastic so it it does flow it it you
know it can kind of Bend and now and
again when the pressure is just right
you can have the part of it uh
uh liquify and then it can erupt of our
you know fancy geology
which was one of the things that makes
geology fascinating so he would expect
to have continental drift on Venus you'd
expect the surface the crust not to be
one just solid bit like an egg but
rather like a cracked egg where the bits
the continents float around on top of
the mantle
which is again plastic and more dense
the crust is low density and so it's
there up at the top the crust is
completely solid of course it is but the
mantle is hot and now and again you get
these regions where part of it can
liquefy when it liquefies that's what we
call magma and then it corrupt out of
volcanoes and it becomes lava when it
becomes comes when it gets to the
surface and so they're saying that uh
they've re-analyzed some pictures and so
they've got some pretty pictures there
of the surface of Venus from a long time
ago
um
uh but they've re-analyzed them they're
saying well these things are actually
active these volcanoes that we took
pictures over actually active let's read
through the article
researchers have found evidence of
active volcanism on the surface of Venus
for the first time although the planet
although the closest planet to Earth is
known to have prominent volcanic
features it's unknown whether it's
geologically young surface is down to
ancient or ongoing volcanic activity I
would say well
the best hypothesis is that being
similar to Earth it would have current
day
you know active geology
the New Evidence comes from a manual
search of radar images from NASA's
Magellan spacecraft the Spurs first
spacecraft to image the entire surface
of Venus which orbited the planet from
1990 to 1994. Magellan was the first
planetary spacecraft launched from a
space shuttle in 1989.
the images which have only been
available in high resolution in recent
years stopped short of revealing an
exploding volcano but show a one square
mile vent that changes shape over eight
months there you go there's your Smoking
Gun
the research was published today in
science which was two days ago we're
looking at 14th of March
that's evidence of a lava flow emanating
from the vent say the researchers which
obviously indicates ongoing volcanic
activity on Venus
the volcanic vent is part of the larger
Mart mons volcano system a huge shield
volcano that rises three miles above the
surrounding planes
uh yeah so we should not only expect it
to be volcanically active geologically
active the volcanoes to be erupting and
we could expect more of them I mean
Venus is hot
uh just by the fact it's closer to the
sun it's got this atmosphere and so
therefore
the heat which on Earth
escapes more readily from the core of
our planet out through the mantle
to the crust and then off into outer
space that process would be
significantly slowed down by the
extremely hot atmosphere that is
retaining so much more heat so I just
blanket over the top insulating Venus
from
it's the the cold environment the space
so it's hot core would be hotter than
ours one would guess
um
they go on to say
the estimates of how often eruptions
might occur on Venice have been
speculative ranging from several large
eruptions per year to one such eruption
every several or even tens of years said
Robert Herrick a professor of University
of Alaska Fairbanks geological
geophysical Institute
weekends he said we can now say Venus is
presently or volcanically active in the
sense there are at least a few eruptions
per year
so there we go it's great news for the
two upcoming missions to Venus DaVinci
plus and veritas both of which will
launch between 2028 and 2030. so we have
some
um the missions to Venus coming up
um
Venus is interesting for astronomers but
certainly not for anyone who's
interested in life elsewhere in the
universe because it is an exceedingly
hostile place
you're looking at what around about 400
degrees Celsius there on the surface of
the planet air pressure
90 times that of Earth where it rains
sulfuric acid so
you know you step outside of your
spacesuit if you were to travel there
and you'd be promptly
corroded crushed and cooked
not a friendly place
to go and have a holiday
so the da Vinci probe heading there and
it's called DaVinci because that stands
for
deep atmosphere Venus investigation of
noble gases chemistry and imaging Plus
and that will analyze Venus's atmosphere
to understand how it formed and evolved
and determine whether Venus ever had an
ocean yeah perhaps I mean it would be
remarkable but perhaps
um
uh it did have liquid water in the past
via mechanisms I don't understand and
then the thing
boiled away
um who knows why
my guess is that it never had
any such ocean
that it always formed too close to the
Sun it was always too hot there it would
have been bombarded as we were by comets
at some point in its history from the
art cloud delivering water but that
water would have immediately vaporized
almost immediately vaporized my guess is
my conjecture is it's always hot but I'm
not an expert in these things
um
of these people aren't so we await what
they have to say about it the other
probe that's heading there is called
Veritas and that stands for venous
emissivity radar Science in SAR
topography and spectroscopy it'll be the
first mission to study the venusian
surface of since Magellan it will orbit
the planet and peer through the
obscuring clouds with a powerful radar
system it will create a 3D global map
using radar use a near-infrared
spectrometer to see what the surface is
made of and measure the planet's
gravitational field to determine the
structure of the planet's interior we
can expect the upcoming Venus missions
will observe new volcanic flows that
have occurred since Magellan ended three
years ago three decades ago
we should see some activity occurring
while two upcoming orbital missions are
correcting images said Professor Herrick
the geologist
um yeah so there we go we've got
missions to Venus coming up over the
next few years
um
final piece of science news for now
is that a scan I like this one because
here we have talk of extinctions
where they admit it's not climate change
or the action of people that's doing it
at least not obviously
the headline is a skin eating fungal
plague is silently tearing through
Wildlife across Africa scientists swarm
silently Terry be it'll be more
frightening if this fungal plague was
making noises it did so I'd say it's
silently tearing through Wildlife all
right so
the headline is a lethal skin-eating
fungus has been spreading rapidly across
African Wildlife since the turn of the
century scientists warned Wednesday
shedding light on an unnoticed amphibian
plague that has driven more species to
Extinction or near Extinction than any
other pathogen and now risks wiping out
even more across the African continent
Okay so
the amphibians are being wiped out by a
plague
in Africa that's not good
presumably
um
yeah it's always hard to say in these
things should we do something about this
should we stop the plague
is it necessary to have evolutionary
pressures
would people getting involved
cause things to happen that are worse
than what the outcome of the plague
would be
we don't understand evolution
entirely
we always talk about trying to prevent
the extinction of creatures as if it's a
bad thing but it is also the thing
that's always going on but is saying
that it's always gone on
the naturalistic fallacy of a client
you know that that just because
extinctions in the past have occurred
that we should allow them to continue in
the future would that be the
naturalistic fallacy
I don't know
I don't think we know enough about
Evolution to say
um and so
what the article I'm skipping the
details the article but they do go on to
say
quote amphibians matter more than most
people realize and losing them could
have major consequences foremost
amphibians are keystone species of many
ecosystems meaning their loss can
dramatically change the environment for
the worse
these Downstream consequences can have a
big impact impact such as driving
malaria cases up dramatically as
therefore fewer frogs keep mosquitoes in
check biodiversity is an important
driver of innovation notably medicine
and the more species that are lost the
fewer opportunities we have to learn
from them for example salamanders which
possess a remarkable ability to regrow
tissues organs or even limbs are being
studied with the view through unlocking
new ways of treating serious wounds well
yes okay but I I don't I don't think we
have to worry about
researchers running out of salamanders
I'm sure we can keep a few on on ice so
to speak or in the water so to speak to
do research on how it is they're able to
regrow their limbs and organs which
would be a useful thing to know we want
to know that we want to know why certain
species never seem to show evidence of
cancer like sharks apparently it doesn't
matter how old the shark gets whenever
they capture them they never find ones
with cancer perhaps because it's a
selection effect perhaps only the ones
that don't have cancer are the ones that
um you catch later on in life the early
ones that you catch haven't developed
cancer the ones that do develop cancer
diet either quickly from it or perhaps
other sharks with the wonderful smell
that they have
know if a fellow shark has a tumor or
has cancer and they eat it
taking it out of the any possibility of
being captured but you know this is the
theory that sharks simply don't have
tumors they don't get cancer and we
study them in order to find out is there
something we can learn here so something
genetic we can do
uh you know insert some shark genes into
US somehow and therefore never get
cancer and and can we insert some
salamander genes into people of the
future and have the remarkable ability
to regrow tissues organs or even limbs
that would be good
okay
that does my science news for today
except maybe we'll mention one more
thing this is sort of the intersection
of Science and other stuff philosophy
which is an article in Forbes also the
chat GPT debate are we intelligent
enough to understand intelligence and
I'm not going to read the whole article
just to say it's written by
neuroscientist and I broadly agree with
what he says and what the people he
interviews says namely the
chat gpt4
shows zero indication that it's
understanding things understanding
things in the way that we understand
things
uh El Diablo I can see your chat yes can
you hear me is the question
um
hopefully yeah so far it's been going
well this week I I've had experiences
other times where I've been talking for
a few minutes and um I haven't been hurt
but I think I figured out what went
wrong
um
yeah and so
for Forbes people certainly this article
is one of the ones that was more a more
sober take on chat gpt4 they were
talking to uh
at least some people involved in
cognitive science Neuroscience that kind
of thing I didn't see any amongst the
people that were interviewing uh
philosophers as such
but it is one of those areas where
people discussing chat GPT for
the experts that people go to
are the wrong kind of experts and so you
end up with the wrong kind of
um opinions I would say
for example people ask physicists this
question
I I have very little
there needs to be something that the
specific physicist you're talking to has
said that would indicate that
they're worth listening to on topics
outside of physics before I grant them
you know
before I grant them the notion that
they're going to be worth listening to
on anything outside of physics they have
to say something they have to
demonstrate first that they're
philosophically sophisticated they have
a broad understanding rather than a
narrow one they've read widely they've
engaged with certain ideas but just
because you're a physicist
doesn't Grant you
any special insight into any other area
people have this idea that you know
that if you study Physics it's often
physics okay
that somehow rather that
that does something to your brain
that if you do really well at physics
that somehow that physics knowledge
affects all the other things you think
about in a way that it sharpens them up
and so that all of your opinions are
therefore more valuable than someone
else's
and it's just not true I can tell you
there's nothing in a Physics degree that
gives you any special insight into
anything outside of physics
I've been astonished at times
with how ignorant certain people with
physics degrees are of Simply chemistry
the next nearest subject but they are
understandably some of them hate organic
chemistry so it astonishes me why
people will go to a physicist who's
Bachelors was in physics maybe they've
got a master in physics they do PhD in
physics I know become a physics
professor and then they interviewed
about
philosophy and morality
and where the chat GPT is intelligent or
conscious and whatever
none of them mine physics computer
scientists similarly
you know sometimes a computer scientist
has a sophisticated understanding of
the significance of things like
universality let's say that's better
that could be broader
but yeah my point here is that
my heuristic is
look at their uvoir their back catalog
of staff
you you read David deutsche's book and
you realize okay here's a person where I
would like to go to him if there's a
question about some system like chat
gpt7
as to whether or not this thing is
understanding stuff
that's the person I want to because he
studied epistemology he's understanding
the the significance of computer science
and and what what computation can say
and how the what explanation is a
preeminent expert on explanation and
therefore understanding
it just so happens to be a physicist and
that doesn't hurt what he's saying it
enhances it but
the physics enhances the philosophical
knowledge which enhances the physics and
it's this wonderful kind of coherent
worldview that comes together and there
are some other people like this as well
I'm saying David Deutsch is The Lone
Ranger yes I think it's probably
the preeminent example the Exemplar
but any random physicist or any random
philosopher any random Neuroscience not
necessarily you don't get any special
Insight by studying becoming really good
at one particular thing
we know this
uh on most other topics
if you are the world's greatest
cardiologist
we're the world's greatest cardiologists
we're not going to go to you for
neurosurgery
brain surgery
we're not going to go to you necessarily
for
even four by the way
nutritional advice
well I find that again a selection
effect
people say oh you know the cardiologist
they know they don't know about
nutrition because after all
they're seeing all these people with
heart problems and a lot of these people
who've got heart problems have had a
let's pick a thing I know this isn't
true but you know they ate a lot of
fried food so therefore they don't eat
fried food well again that could be a
selection effect perhaps
that's statistics
you could give a hundred people fried
food throughout their lives 50 of them
will develop heart disease they're the
ones that the cardiologists see the
cardiologist doesn't see the other 50
that don't
say is it the fried food that causes
heart disease in people some people but
not everyone it's not a an all All or
Nothing thing
so yeah
um let's say anyway this article here um
yeah it just concludes in line with
broadly what I think about
gpt4 which is a wonderful thing it's
amazing I mean it's giving me far better
answers
but it's still it's still
it's still refusing to say it doesn't
know things
the esoteric question
I asked GPT 3.5 chat GPT 305 the
previous version
was
I asked it
what was the role of the Vichy
police force or the police force in
Vichy France the civilian police force
in Vichy France during World War II with
respect to Nazi soldiers committing
crimes are there any examples
of civilian police officers
enviche France
arresting
Nazi soldiers
for
Petty or serious crimes like assault a
robbery let's say
rather than say let's say Church rather
than to say I have no data on this or I
don't know
it said
there probably were no instances of
Vichy police
arresting Nazi soldiers
which is not what I asked I don't care
about whether probably or not I want to
know and if you don't know and you don't
have a source then that's fine I know
the arguments already I know that it's
it would be astonishing if that happened
I'd love to know an actual case
what were you know to get an insight
into how is once the Germans were in
charge of France
how was regular policing done how is
regular crime looked after
and what if the occupying German forces
committed crime was the military police
did the civilian police have anything to
do with this okay I don't know of any
documents and I've looked and looked and
looked Okay Googled and all this sort of
stuff so I thought chapter
rather than just come up with and say up
front look there's no doubt on this it
says there probably weren't why say that
well you don't need to say that there
doesn't need to be a statement of of
confidence about this
just say
my training data didn't include any
examples of this
that's it that would satisfy me and I
think that's a better way to go they
should it should admit when it doesn't
know something but you know yeah well
all right so I'm going to go to
questions now
from firstly from
patreon
so there's a there's a long patreon
question here I'm gonna have to kind of
cut this short today because um have
something to do at three so let me get
through these quickly it's going to be
rapid fire now
although this first question is quite
wordy nonetheless it's the patreon so
respect our patrons here and RJ
has asked firstly it's a story so bear
with us for the Preamble hey Brent I was
in a debate the other day with a friend
who says he was reading the fabric of
reality and can't take Deutsch seriously
in chapter 10 on the nature of
mathematics after he said quote thanks
to girdle we know that there will never
be a fixed method of determining whether
a mathematical proposition is true any
more than there is a fixed way of
determining whether a scientific theory
is true
end quote I've read this chapter many
times and I believe the person I was
talking to
misinterpreted the entire chapter
but he wanted to send an email to
Deutsche that included this quote
the FIS girdle evaluated was based on
the system Russell and white had
designed in principia Mathematica and he
proved that the content of the
mathematics cannot be reduced to a PM
like FAS but this does not mean we lack
a fixed method of determining whether a
mathematical proposition is true if for
example you allow complete induction to
be applied to Quantified Expressions
then you can readily prove a statement
in a classical number theory that would
be undecidable in a PM like FAS
of course the PM like FIS does not
contain an axiom of complete induction
on Quantified expression so it is not
surprising that it cannot cannot capture
all the theorems of classical number
Theory
end quote okay so
what's my the question is basically what
is my take on that
firstly girdles incompleteness theorem
was
yeah it was a response so the the person
you're responding to it seems to be
laboring under some misconception about
what it was doing it is not the case
that
the principia mathematical is authored
by Russell and Whitehead among other
things to try and find a foundational
basis for all of mathematics so axioms
across geometry algebra calculus Etc
arithmetic
and to say once you had all these axioms
you'd have the complete set of axioms
and then you could prove anything from
this complete set of axioms in theory
being able to program some computer
mechanically to be able to just spit out
the answer to your question
this was shown to be false because of
what girdle did
the project the underlying project of
principia Mathematica
was shown to not be possible because
girdle looked at
the axioms for arithmetic for arithmetic
they have anything to do with principia
Mathematica it was Pino's axioms of
arithmetic that he used to show they
were incomplete
incomplete meaning you could write down
a true statement true proposition
which
had no proof within that system that's
the incompleteness now remember for
girdles
PhD thesis he proved the completeness of
predicate logic predicate logic so first
sort of logic you can show that it is
complete and predicate logic predicate
logic is that logic which contains the
operators for all and there exists and
girdle was able to show that this logic
system was sound a complete sound to
meant beginning with the axioms you
could never prove a contradiction you
could you would always prove things true
within that system given the accent
things that were just as true as the
premises
your conclusions would be just as true
as the premises that's soundness
as long as you have valid proof
completeness said that all things that
you could write down that were true in
the system would have proofs
that's complete
sagirdle showed that for anything as
sophisticated as
um
simple arithmetic
that you you would always have
incomplete stuff
and so
you could always add axioms you could
always come up with a new system of
mathematics and that is why David says
there will never be a fixed method of
determining whether a mathematical
proposition is true anyone there is a
fixed way of determining whether
scientific theory is true
this also goes to
the fact that
to prove something true would mean
finally once and for all without
possibility of Evan having the
possibility of there being an error
which is physically impossible there is
no such method there is no such perfect
method
in the privacy of our own minds we make
blunders and mistakes our brains are
physical objects doing the computing
they can make mistakes
the laws of physics say that when you
write down symbols on a piece of paper
it is possible however unlikely it is
possible that those symbols can change
with lots of quantum mechanics
that is what we understand the laws of
quantum mechanics to be
so therefore any proof you do that
appears to you to be valid and appears
to you to prove something true could in
fact contain an error
fallibalism is always an everywhere
governing proof as it governs
scientific explanation
so you can't get to this final sentence
so your friend is wrong
um there is no fixed method for getting
to the truth
and by the way there's always going to
be new ways of doing mathematics you can
always improve stuff
find a new round a new way of proving
things but the central point is
we are fallible
all proofs are computations computations
require a computer a computer is made
out of matter matter abase physical laws
the physical laws mandate the
possibility of error and never allow you
to completely ensure that you can have
Perfection at the end of any computation
error can creep in always you can't rule
it out
Ergo you can't prove things absolutely
once and for all finally true
the best you can say this is the best
explanation I have that c squared equals
a squared plus b squared here's my proof
my proof is a computation I see nothing
better I see no I see no way in which
this thing could be false except that
I'm fallible
but until such time as someone points
out
how it's false I accept that c squared
equals a squared plus b squared and for
the rest of mathematical knowledge
and for the rest of scientific knowledge
I accept that this is the explanation
this is the best idea
it hasn't been refuted
that's the way knowledge works but
that's not to say it's impossible for it
to be refuted which is what it would
take
in order to say that something is
absolutely true
finally true so that's um
the first
uh
patreon question
the second patreon question is hybrid I
read beginning of infinity first with
lots of help from your podcast and I'm
currently halfway through fabric of
reality again getting lots of help from
you I do not have a background in most
of the topics being covered other than
computer science so as a relative
layperson I am wondering if you could
highlight or talk about how David's
thinking evolved between his first book
and the second
I have read or seem to remember either
yourself or David talking about things
he would have written differently if he
wrote them now
I guess another way to say it would be
to ask you if there is anything in the
fabric of reality that I should watch
out for that is incorrect that David or
others have since corrected okay
um yes the best place to go to find this
out is to purchase
the fabric of reality audiobook and at
the beginning of the fabric of reality
audiobook David Deutsch has new content
it goes for a few minutes answering that
precise question what's changed over the
last few years since the fabric of
reality was produced written
three things one
just to summarize one David says he used
the word justify our justification more
liberally than what he would have liked
to what he meant by justification
was that you're justified in using a
particular rule that that
you're justified in relying upon the
science given the best explanation it
doesn't mean that something is Justified
true that's not what he meant that's not
what he means by justification if
something is Justified it means well
you're right to use this thing okay you
want to
have a GPS system
you're justified in using general
relativity in order to you know find the
location of things that's a
justification
okay so that's the first thing he would
change that however he would he would
slightly alter the language or at least
clarify that so that's to watch out for
watch out for the use of the word
justification
the second thing is that at the end of
the book
he
it talks about certain cosmological
models which have since been refuted
there will be no big crunch and so
there's no point worrying about what
tipler's big crunch thing was all about
um
so that's the second thing what's the
third thing I've forgotten now
um so we've got
he justification I've forgotten now if
there's something else that he would
have written differently now
foreign
things anyway they use the word
justification at the end uh watch out
for uh the stuff on cosmology which has
actually been refuted
uh okay
if I remember that and I'll come back to
it
Mo issy commented on your post hey Brett
I was curious how we should think about
abortion in regards to our best theories
of what a person is oh going in for the
um
and more light-hearted what is your
favorite flavor of ice cream
trying to get me canceled here
um I think I'm just pretty standard on
the ice cream thing I think I'm just
going to go chocolate is that boring
otherwise blueberry
these days there's just so many flavors
to choose
um
it seems like everyone who goes on those
MasterChef shows has a new way of making
sorbet or ice cream that has a really
weird flavor
but the first question how should we
think about abortion in regards to our
best theories of what a person is so my
theory of this is that
there comes a point where
the fetus
has a brain which can conjecture and
once it has a brain that can conjecture
I say it can suffer
now we've got the problem of well
how much can it suffer and all sorts of
things like that
I would say that there's absolutely no
controversy
in the first term of having an abortion
because
the zygote a single cell the blastocyst
the multiple cells that form the sphere
that are undifferentiated
uh
throughout throughout that first
trimester
I would say that
living thing because it's not about
whether it's living on it's living
is not conscious not capable of having
an experience
and therefore is not to be regarded as a
person with the rights of a person
foreign
the other person who has strong opinions
on this is euron Brooke who basically
says look
no person has to claim on the right of
the life of another person
but he doesn't get into the difficult
part of well what about a day before
birth
I think that the the conclusion of his
but I don't want to speak with him but
if you say that
in the context of abortion then you're
saying that you can have an abortion
up until the moment of birth
like what a minute before rather than
just giving birth
so there's something magical therefore
about
the cervix there that once you've passed
through the birth canal
then you are magically conferred with
independent personhood on your own
but moments before you didn't
you you aren't granted personal I think
that's irrational that doesn't make
sense to me
I don't see anything special about those
few moments
it's
I saw it his problem Authority's problem
is you know when do you say a person is
bald if I pluck one hair out of my ball
of course not 50 a thousand there comes
a point where
um if you've got one hair on your head
the average person would say you're bald
two hairs on your head yeah he's still
bald three hairs you're still bull not
completely Ball but we're just using the
word bold right
so there's no black and white line that
we can draw we don't know yet when we
when we have a good theory of
Consciousness not there yet when we
understand AGI not there yet then we'll
also understand
personhood at the level of babies as
well
so that's
you know that would be my suggestion
there we don't know when personhood
begins we should ER on the side of
caution
but suddenly with that first trimester I
don't see an issue and it's an issue
um
uh we have
uh
I think one more from patreon yeah no
okay
I'm going to Twitter now and to
questions
for this particular live stream
so on Twitter people have asked and I
need to move quickly again here now uh
tibolt asked were you familiar with
naval's ideas around leverage happiness
Etc before discussing with him about the
beginning of infinity and the fabric of
reality
uh and I did respond on Twitter to this
uh I said yeah I watched and listened to
his Joe Rogan and Tim Ferriss
appearances among other things for
example so I already saw Naval as
everyone would have aren't were just
about on Twitter you know it was when I
had one of the big accounts early on
when I joined so he would come up and of
course we had similar interests I think
and so now and again I would see him
tweeting people that were interesting
um tweeting it would just come across my
feet people would retweet him it would
come across my food but I didn't know
you know who this person was you know
it's sort of very mysterious you know
the the the the icon he uses for the
image on Twitter it's a mysterious
person
even the name sounded mysterious to me
Naval what's what is this
um and he first
contacted me
well tweeted me during covert where I
wrote some blog posts about
the reaction to covert
and I was
critical of the authoritarian response
in certain places and
what I saw as
overreach early on other people would
disagree they would say we needed an
abundance of caution and people are
being too Cavalier about
certain viruses and that kind of thing
okay
that's a reasonable debate to have but
anyway I had my views
um they haven't changed much but anyway
Naval quite liked it I think he said I
was being possibly he wasn't as sanguine
as I was I think at that time but that
was the first kind of interaction that
we had so that was the beginning the
very beginning of covert uh and then
over time I was astonished I was
astonished you know that he was this
fellow
that I gradually began to learn about
okay so a very successful entrepreneur
and he was a fan of my podcast
remarkable you know but then again of
course you know I'm in this amazing
position of doing this podcast initially
just for myself and about the work of
David Deutsch and David Deutsch himself
retweets me now again it's a it's an
astonishing position to be in never
before in the history of people has this
quite this situation arisen
quite the situation there isn't
um it's as if you're a person of a
certain era let's say you're a you're a
I don't know what to compare it to
really you know you're you're a young
singer hoping
some
um you know uh be a good singer
and you're putting out
musical numbers and Madonna says you're
a great singer or Britney Spears or you
know Taylor Swift these days of course
becomes a fan of your music
that's the kind of thing that you know
when David Deutsch uh retweets me that's
the sense I get you know this is amazing
and so then Navarre was in that same
sort of category it's like well wow
um this is cool
that someone would be interesting like
that so once I once I found that he was
a fan and then therefore we had these
shared interests and yeah I I became
very curious about looking him up
I was certainly a fan of Joe Rogan's no
no but I I possibly did hear him on Joe
Rogan and I remember because yeah he
said stuff about
um
uh AI Automation and and
the uh you know welfare state and that
kind of thing
Universal basic income in particular
Universal basic income was something I'd
written about and when I heard Naval
talk about it on Joe Rogan I thought
here we are like-minded I'm very
like-minded with this person
um and then I started listening to as
many of his appearances as I could
um and realized yeah this is a person
who we think the same way a whole bunch
of things so of course uh given that
even independent of
uh being fans of David Deutsch
we already agreed on a whole bunch of
things it seemed to me
and so given that given that commonality
of course we're going to agree on the
beginning of infinity and the fabric of
reality being
the most astonishing books of the last
I want to say century
perhaps all time yeah
well you can kind of say that because
they both build upon don't they
excellent books that have gone before
yeah
um two Builders asked I'm curious if
you've adopted any idea in your life or
thinking not that it matters necessarily
where an idea come from yeah the most
important idea I think I have
taken on from Naval
is
just
just being more kind about deadlines
you know Naval is very you know
obviously
famously
you know he is an outsider who
managed to accomplish great things by
not being an authoritarian Overlord even
though he is the boss of lots of stuff
lots of things ostensibly
owner and shareholder and investor and
all this sort of stuff
but gives the people running the various
things freedom
to work and to create
and so this is something in my life that
you know I think he's taught me is to
kind of relax about relax about trying
to get
because when I was a teacher of course
you have deadlines to meet you've got to
be up at a certain time you've got a
everything is highly scheduled you know
that's this is the truth of almost all
jobs
uh but working with Nevada is not like
that and so I've had to take that on
I've had to unlearn what I learned
I learned a specific kind of discipline
and now I have a
different uh a different certainly a
different approach to doing things and
I am more productive
as a result and more creative I think as
a result
by not
setting particular standards that I need
to meet which is something else you know
taught by well-meaning people throughout
my life you know set goals set yourself
goals of course don't you want to have a
goal in life yeah they're striving
towards no and this is where David and
Naval sort of you know have this
Meeting of Minds even though they use
different language it's about having fun
and making the most of your life and by
doing that
you achieve what other people achieve
when they talk about goals
the other people are setting fixed in
stone this particular thing
but you can get more than that done
by relinquishing the idea of a goal and
instead striving to have fun
solving problems
and realizing that when you're working
towards a solution something better
might come along and it's not a bad
thing
to swap lanes and to do that other thing
whereas the goal-oriented person over
there says they're not going to be
distracted they are doggedly going to
pursue this thing until they get it
no matter what nothing's going to get in
my way that kind of thing that kind of
attitude
and over here
saying it's not that other things might
get in your way
that something might present itself that
is objectively better and you better
keep your eyes open for that objectively
better opportunity
and Naval also has this idea of
playing long-term games with long-term
people
which I think is also a fantastic
philosophy of Life figuring out the
people that
going to work with
you in a way that allows everyone to
thrive
you and them okay you'll move on to the
next question
um
has said
Sean cariller said the law is governing
everyday life are completely known in
that new successor laws to gr and CM
will only apply to very small scatter
very large Scouts what do you think I
also answered this one and I said well
he's just wrong about that
um
you know everywhere is a beginning of
infinity really
everywhere contains unknown stuff
people work in research in areas where
there are open problems but everywhere
can be an open problem we can always ask
more kind of stuff
um
about anything uh doesn't matter what
the object is what the thing is in
reality
um
see that sankavi asks struggle between
thought processes and David Deutsch and
Eastern philosophy of being at peace
I've read the beginning of infinity and
also
Krishna umati and venturing into
Buddhism and going back to Papa a lot of
people say this a lot of people say that
there is there are so many Echoes of
Eastern wisdom in the books of David
Deutsch especially the beginning of
infinity and absolutely you know this
idea that you never have an
unproblematic state but you're moving
from better problem to better problem
and that peace can be found in simply
solving your problem over time
and I think this is what ancient wisdom
says
life doesn't need to be constant
suffering
suffering itself is just a problem to be
solved
um tibol has asked any favorite books on
the enlightenment
uh
I hope historians pick up on deutsche's
tradition of criticism idea and study it
further especially what brought it
brought about for so long
are you aware of ideas from Deutsch
picked up by historians I'm not aware
I'm not aware
but my favorite books on okay one is one
book on the enlightenment
which uh I don't think sold very well
but deserves to be better known as
inventing Freedom by Daniel Hannon
that's coming up very well inventing
Freedom by Daniel Hannon and
that's that's absolutely brilliant so I
got that in paperback I think I could
have been paid back because it's not
available
on Kindle
um so that's how the Westminster system
the Magna Carta
leading through to some Modern
um
democracy in Britain
contained ideas and laid the foundations
for the possibility of Rapid progress
and peace and stability and all that
sort of stuff the other one of course
famously the other book on the
enlightenment
is called
the creation of the modern world by Roy
Porter which is well worth having a look
at if you're interested in stuff on the
enlightenment they're the two main ones
that I've read beyond the beginning of
infinity
has asked
ah great physics question from jiten
uh he says I've always wondered
something about redshift I understand
the explanation when explained as the
stretching of the wave as space expands
but what is going on at the level of the
photon how does individual photon
carrying an amount of energy that we
call Blue change into a photon that we
see as red
I are carrying a different less amount
of energy what happens to the photons
energy where does it go aha okay
there are what you're talking about
Jason is
the expansion of space due to the Big
Bang
and therefore photons become redshifted
over time where does the energy go
well
you have to consider
when we talk about conservation of
energy we talk about an isolated system
an isolated system
has energy conserved in it if the
system's not isolated then the energy
can get in and leak out
so if you're talking about the universe
is expanding
and these photons are being emitted from
distant galaxies which are redshifted
due to the expansion of space you have
to consider where all the energy in the
universe is and what it's doing and
what's happening there
is the potential energy of gravitation
is being exchanged with kinetic energy
and you're getting this this reduction
in the amount of energy in the photons
if you do the calculations for all of
the energy in the universe
then there is no problem here
for any
that's one issue the other issue is
somewhat related to what I'm about to
talk about which is not the same process
but you can get this in your mind
if you look at stars within the Milky
Way
some of the stars are moving away from
the solar system from our perspective
here on Earth there's motions everywhere
some of the stars appear to be moving
towards us some are moving away okay the
ones that are moving away
their light appears to be redshifted
so they emit the light let's say in the
blue to make it simple and when it gets
to us it's in the red energy has been
lost where's the energy gone
huh
here's the problem and this is also
related to the cosmological redshift
version as well
that's not an isolated system
from the perspective of the star
emitting the light it's emitting the
blue photons
those photons never cease to be blue
never cease to be blue
they go out
they're blue
everywhere they go they're blue
only for the Observer on the earth
because of relative motion between the
star and the Earth
do the people on Earth receive red
and they always appear red
you can't talk about
the emission and the observation
of the photons
simultaneously as if you're talking
about the one frame of reference which
encapsulates where
the law of conservation of energy would
apply
hopefully that helps
that's the other Factor okay
um
next question
a couple of questions on YouTube and
then I will call it a day
um hopefully I'll get to everyone's oh
I've got a
yeah okay so
on on YouTube here
[Music]
El Diablo you're a Britney Spears
Britain really
um
Pete Taylor why didn't Sam Harris get it
like nivaldi I don't know
I don't know
um
I was listening to Sam had an interview
that went for four and a half hours or
something with Lex Friedman
and I've only listened to the very
beginnings of it
um
foreign
yeah there's a different conjectural
knowledge is a is a tough thing and in a
sense I think that sometimes conjectural
knowledge is the whole story
when it comes to this and if you don't
get that
then it affects what you think people
are and what people are capable of
you know Sam talks about for example the
people who vote for Trump
as if they're incapable of understanding
certain things
as if
in some way
they're not that because they're not
seeing the world in the way he does
that therefore
they're closed to a part of reality
that he is seeing clearly
and I think that this is the distinction
between
the idea of knowledge as being justified
and I even though he might deny it a
bucket Theory where you take on the true
ideas and you're entitled to become more
confident over time versus
everyone has infinite ignorance and what
we're doing is conjecturing explanations
which capture partial truths about an
objective world
this is not to say that some people
can't be objectively wrong of course
they can
but this vision of conjectural knowledge
gives you an increased amount of
compassion and understanding for people
who stand and start contrast to you
because you understand that on many
issues you are them
you are wrong
fundamentally about things
because there's no Royal Road to truth
or no method of being correct so we
should all expect in certain places to
be completely wrong and in fact about
everything
error abounds
and you should never be overly confident
feel the sense of being justified
because that way
lies tyranny
as Papa would talk about it the doctrine
that the truth is manifest
leaves the tyranny
yeah and so yeah that's what I I think
that that is my diagnosis of many people
who
um
don't get David Deutsch
it's about that conjectural knowledge
thing
because that's that runs deep
that runs the idea that you can have a
solution to a problem that's final
and not improve stuff
when you do that even if you're an
anti-dogmatist you can become dogmatic
about that
about the whole idea that you are so
anti-dogma that you can't possibly have
your brain polluted by bad ideas because
you've eviscerated bad ideas from your
mind something like that
uh
yeah
so I think that's it I've gone through
um our questions
um thank you for the people who have
contributed on YouTube today as well
that's great
um
until tomorrow in fact because I'm doing
one of these each day this week whether
or not I can keep up that
that level of intensity next week will
be another thing
um but tomorrow
um we'll do something different again
it's labor science news and lots of
really interesting questions thanks
everyone thanks everyone in the chat see
you tomorrow